# Multiple_domestication_events_explain_the_origin_of_landraces_of_Gossypium_hirsutum_in_Mexico
This repository contain the code used  to  perform  our  analyses  and  figures to the article: Multiple domestication events explain the origin of landraces of *Gossypium hirsutum* in Mexico 

Melania Vega 1,2*, Christian Quintero-Corrales 2,3, Alicia Mastretta-Yanes 4,5, Alejandro Casas 6, Victorina López-Hilario 7, Ana Wegier 1*

1 Genética de la Conservación, Jardín Botánico, Instituto de Biología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico City, Mexico.
2 Posgrado en Ciencias Biológicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico City, Mexico.
3 Departamento de Botánica, Instituto de Biología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Circuito exterior s/n, Ciudad Universitaria,  04510 Coyoacán, Ciudad de México, Mexico.
4 Comisión Nacional para el Conocimiento y Uso de la Biodiversidad (CONABIO), Liga Periférico Insurgentes Sur 4903, Col. Parques del Pedregal, Tlalpan, Ciudad de Mexico, Mexico.
5 Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnología (CONACYT) Programa de Investigadores e Investigadoras por México, Insurgentes Sur 1582, 03940 Benito Juárez, CDMX, Mexico.
6 Instituto de Investigaciones en Ecosistemas y Sustentabilidad, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Morelia, Mexico.
7 Tejedoras Amuzgas De Piedra Pesada, Guerrero, México.


#### Abstract
Several Mesoamerican crops constitute wild-to-domesticated complexes generated by multiple events of initial domestication and continuous gene flow among crop populations, and between these populations and their wild relatives. It has been suggested that cotton domestication, Gossypium hirsutum, started in the northwest of the Yucatán Peninsula from where it diffused to other regions in and out of Mexico. We tested this hypothesis by assembling chloroplast genomes of 23 wild, landraces, and breeding lines (transgene-introgressed and conventional). The phylogenetic analysis showed that the cotton evolutionary history in Mexico involves multiple events of introgression and genetic divergence. This information allows concluding that Mexican landraces were generated from multiple wild populations.  Results also show that the structural and function plastome organization are conserved. However, genetic diversity decreases as a consequence of domestication, mainly in transgene-introgressed (TI) individuals (π=0.00020, 0.00001, 0.00016, 0, and 0, of wild, TI-wild, landraces, TI-landraces, and breeding lines, respectively). We identified homologous regions that differentiate wild from domesticated, and indicate relationships among the samples. Since a decrease in genetic diversity associated with transgene introgression in cotton is identified for the first time, our outcomes are relevant to biosecurity and agrobiodiversity conservation.
